---
title: "Downside of Keeping Everything Confidential: How Segway Turned A Disaster."
description: "Keeping everything confidential won’t lead to growth."
category: "Economics"
pubDate: 2023-08-19
draft: false
---

Before Elon Musk, around the time of the birth of Tesla Motors, there was another guy holding the title “modern day Edison”. A tech whiz often called the Batman of Silicon Valley. Among hundreds of his patents, his portable dialysis machine became the medical product of the year, iBOT or a wheelchair that can climb up stairs, a revolutionary prosthetic arm, solar-powered Stirling engine, and a portable drug infusion pump AutoSyringe, which resulted in more precise medication schedule and reduced the time patients spent on hospitals. The success of iBOT struck a lightbulb in the inventor, Dean Kamen’s head. What if there was a small, lightweight and compact personal transporter that could balance on its own? Think about it…it’s like standing on a carpet like Aladdin that takes you where ever you wanna go. He hired a bunch of talented engineers and built a prototype of Segway and predicated it would “be to car what the car was to the horse and buggy”. In other words, reshape the entire urban transportation system. 

Moved by the the prototype Steve Jobs said, this invention would be as influential as the personal computer. John Doerr invested $80 million in Segway, and predicted it would be the fastest company to reach $1 billion and projected it would reach 1 million units per year in sales within a year. But the reason I brought this up is because Segway, in it’s lifetime only managed to sell only about 140,000 units. Boom! One of the biggest technological disasters of the 21st century. Doerr wasn’t another new guy on the block with a lot of money. He became a legend in the valley after successfully betting on Google. What went wrong?

No doubt, Dean Kamen is a genius. But there were lots of questions where Segway failed to live up to. Who specifically am I targeting with this product? Is it a technology push to the market? Is the price too high for everyday people? If someone goes out to get groceries, where would he put his bags? Is there any safely concerns? These are just a few but the real question is Why? How could these errors persisted to the production line? Nobody saw those things? No even the genius Dean Kamen? No. Nobody saw those things. Because there wasn’t anybody to see those things. 

When the lightbulb struck in Kamen’s head, he immediately hired a bunch of top engineers he knew from his previous projects and closed the door for the rest of the world. Meaning, close the door to any kind of feedback. He maintained strict secrecy rules and the culture of need-to-know-basis was at its golden age. Only if you directly work on the development of Segway or a potential investor, then you get to see what’s happening behind the curtain. 

It isn’t just product failure that comes with the package of keeping everything confidential. It inevitably creates silos within your organization. Giving access to information that some department directly need will ensure military graded security but also creates a culture of mistrust. I only know what was assigned to me and no idea what my buddy James from electrical is up to even though we’re on the same project. And If everything happens in isolation then the question arises from my side, what am I contributing to? Not even CIA has this level of security. You can talk about stuffs with your peers. 

Justin berg at Stanford spent quiet some time investigating this. Why do we fail to predict the success of novel ideas? What he found out was that it’s not the audience’s approval or the investor’s orgasm that matter. What matter is your peer evaluating your work. When artist evaluate one another’s acts, they’re twice as accurate as the managers or audience because there’s no risk-aversion attached to their judgments. Ever wondered why every shirt looks perfect once you bought the one you kinda like? Yeah, it’s just that. Buying a shirt already gives you enough distance to objectively grade another shirt on display. Now stamp everything as Top-Secret, there’s no way you’re open to critical feedbacks.  

I love Toyota as an example. Their way wasn’t about efficiency, but finding better away of doing things which ultimately led to a continuous cycle of efficiency. You might recognize it as Kaizen but it’s actually called the Toyota Production System. What Toyota would do is, take people from one team and drop them into a team he knows nothing about. You mix people up, blend different teams to solve problems and somebody will point a view that nobody on that original team could ever come up with. If you send a guy from your design team to business team at your organization, that design team guy will point to something that biz guys never thought of and it’s not because he’s smart but because he brought in a new perspective. And if your response to that is “No, because…” rather than “Yes, if…” you have a rough ride ahead.  

When US companies started employing this in the 90s, they began calling it ‘Lean’. Boy, are these folks the masters of butchering everything! Toyota isn’t the result of keeping everything confidential. It resulted from people of different mindset and department shuffling along, and making room for them to project their ideas and actually taking them seriously. No US companies ever successfully executed the Lean model. Because none of us are smart enough or even strong to navigate or lead everything by ourselves. 

With 400+ patents up until that point, Kamen did develop his own kiss-the-frog-till-you-find-the-prince technique. “He encouraged his engineers to try out many variations to increase their chances of stumbling on the right one.” writes the famous organizational psychologist and a professor at Wharton, Adam Grant in Originals, “But he settled on the Segway before considering other ideas for solving transportation problems…” Engineers iterated over lots of ideas but didn’t have enough critical input to make the right choices. 

It doesn’t mean we should make everything open-source. Nature doesn’t align with that either. That’s how God intended to structure our reality. Some stuffs we humans can perceive and the rest of the creations He kept hidden and those, too, to serve our needs. Business ecosystems are organized in all level of complexity. Stuff is messy. Keeping your development groups in isolation *is* necessary but that has to be within the goldilocks region.